<a href="https://dev.visual-essays.app"><img src="https://dev-visual-essays.netlify.app/images/ve-button.png"></a>

<param ve-config title="Douglas Adams" layout="vertical">
   
# Douglas Adams

**Douglas Noel Adams** (11 March 1952 – 11 May 2001) was an English
[author](author "wikilink"), [screenwriter](screenwriter "wikilink"),
[essayist](essayist "wikilink"),
[humorist](List_of_humorists "wikilink"),
[satirist](satirist "wikilink") and [dramatist](dramatist "wikilink").
Adams was author of *[The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy "wikilink")*, which
originated in 1978 as [a BBC radio
comedy](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(radio_series) "wikilink")
before developing into a "trilogy" of five books that sold more than
15 million copies in his lifetime and generated [a television
series](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(TV_series) "wikilink"),
several stage plays, comics, [a video
game](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(video_game) "wikilink"), and
in 2005 [a feature
film](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(film) "wikilink"). Adams's
contribution to UK radio is commemorated in [The Radio
Academy](Radio_Academy "wikilink")'s Hall of Fame.[^1]
<para ve-image url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/64/Douglas_adams_portrait.jpg">

Adams also wrote *[Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective
Agency](Dirk_Gently's_Holistic_Detective_Agency "wikilink")* (1987) and
*[The Long Dark Tea-Time of the
Soul](The_Long_Dark_Tea-Time_of_the_Soul "wikilink")* (1988), and
co-wrote *[The Meaning of Liff](The_Meaning_of_Liff "wikilink")* (1983),
*[The Deeper Meaning of Liff](The_Deeper_Meaning_of_Liff "wikilink")*
(1990), and *[Last Chance to See](Last_Chance_to_See "wikilink")*
(1990). He wrote two stories for the television series *[Doctor
Who](Doctor_Who "wikilink")*, co-wrote *[City of
Death](City_of_Death "wikilink")*, and served as [script
editor](script_editor "wikilink") for its [seventeenth
season](Doctor_Who_(season_17) "wikilink") in 1979. He co-wrote the
[Monty Python](Monty_Python "wikilink") sketch “[Patient
Abuse](Patient_Abuse "wikilink")” which appeared in the final episode of
*[Monty Python's Flying
Circus](Monty_Python's_Flying_Circus "wikilink")*. A posthumous
collection of his selected works, including the first publication of his
final (unfinished) novel, was published as *[The Salmon of
Doubt](The_Salmon_of_Doubt "wikilink")* in 2002.

Adams was an advocate for environmentalism and
[conservation](conservation_movement "wikilink"), a lover of fast
cars,[^2] [technological innovation](innovation "wikilink") and the
[Apple Macintosh](Macintosh "wikilink"), and a self-proclaimed "[radical
atheist](Anti-theism "wikilink")".

## Early life {#early_life}

Adams was born on 11 March 1952 to Janet (née Donovan; 1927–2016) and
Christopher Douglas Adams (1927–1985) in
[Cambridge](Cambridge "wikilink").[^3] The family moved a few months
after his birth to the [East End of
London](East_End_of_London "wikilink"), where his sister, Susan, was
born three years later.[^4] His parents divorced in 1957; Douglas,
Susan, and their mother moved then to an [RSPCA](RSPCA "wikilink")
animal shelter in [Brentwood, Essex](Brentwood,_Essex "wikilink"), run
by his maternal grandparents.[^5]

### Education {#education}

Adams attended Primrose Hill Primary School in Brentwood. At the age of
nine, he passed the entrance exam for [Brentwood
School](Brentwood_School_(Essex) "wikilink"). He attended the [prep
school](Preparatory_school_(United_Kingdom) "wikilink") from 1959 to
1964, then the main school until December 1970. Adams was tall by age
12, and stopped growing at . His form master, Frank Halford, said that
Adams's height had made him stand out and that he had been
self-conscious about it.[^6][^7] His ability to write stories made him
well known in the school.[^8] He became the only student ever to be
awarded a ten out of ten by Halford for creative writing — something he
remembered for the rest of his life, particularly when facing [writer's
block](writer's_block "wikilink").[^9]

Some of his earliest writing was published at the school, such as a
report on its photography club in *The Brentwoodian* in 1962, or spoof
reviews in the school magazine *Broadsheet*, edited by [Paul Neil Milne
Johnstone](Paul_Neil_Milne_Johnstone "wikilink"), who later became a
character in *The Hitchhiker's Guide*. He also designed the cover of one
issue of the *Broadsheet*, and had a letter and short story published in
*[The Eagle](Eagle_(comic) "wikilink")*, the boys' comic, in 1965. A
poem entitled "A Dissertation on the task of writing a poem on a candle
and an account of some of the difficulties thereto pertaining" written
by Adams in January 1970 at the age of 17, was discovered in a cupboard
at the school in early 2014.[^10]

On the strength of an essay on religious poetry that discussed [the
Beatles](the_Beatles "wikilink") and [William
Blake](William_Blake "wikilink"), he was awarded an
[Exhibition](Exhibition_(scholarship) "wikilink") in English at [St
John's College, Cambridge](St_John's_College,_Cambridge "wikilink"),
going up in 1971. He wanted to join the
[Footlights](Footlights "wikilink"), an invitation-only student comedy
club that has acted as a hothouse for comic talent. He was not elected
immediately as he had hoped, and started to write and perform in revues
with Will Adams (no relation) and Martin Smith; they formed a group
called "Adams-Smith-Adams". He became a member of the Footlights by
1973.[^11] Despite doing very little work — he recalled having completed
three essays in three years — he graduated in 1974 with a 2:2 in
[English literature](English_literature "wikilink").[^12]

## Career {#career}

### Writing {#writing}

After leaving university Adams moved back to London, determined to break
into TV and radio as a writer. An edited version of the *Footlights
Revue* appeared on [BBC2](BBC_Two "wikilink") television in 1974. A
version of the Revue performed live in London's [West
End](West_End_of_London "wikilink") led to Adams being discovered by
[Monty Python](Monty_Python "wikilink")'s [Graham
Chapman](Graham_Chapman "wikilink"). The two formed a brief writing
partnership, earning Adams a writing credit in [episode
45](List_of_Monty_Python's_Flying_Circus_episodes#6._Party_Political_Broadcast "wikilink")
of *Monty Python* for a sketch called "[Patient
Abuse](Patient_Abuse "wikilink")". The pair also co-wrote the "Marilyn
Monroe" sketch which appeared on the soundtrack album of *[Monty Python
and the Holy
Grail](The_Album_of_the_Soundtrack_of_the_Trailer_of_the_Film_of_Monty_Python_and_the_Holy_Grail "wikilink")*.
Adams is one of only two people other than the original Python members
to get a writing credit (the other being [Neil
Innes](Neil_Innes "wikilink")).[^13]

![Adams in his first *[Monty
Python](Monty_Python's_Flying_Circus "wikilink")* appearance, in full
surgeon's
garb](DNA_in_Monty_Python.jpg "Adams in his first Monty Python appearance, in full surgeon's garb")

Adams had two brief appearances in the fourth series of *[Monty Python's
Flying Circus](Monty_Python's_Flying_Circus "wikilink")*. At the
beginning of episode 42, "The Light Entertainment War", Adams is in a
surgeon's mask (as Dr. Emile Koning, according to on-screen captions),
pulling on gloves, while [Michael Palin](Michael_Palin "wikilink")
narrates a sketch that introduces one person after another but never
gets started. At the beginning of episode 44, "Mr. Neutron", Adams is
dressed in a
[pepper-pot](List_of_recurring_Monty_Python's_Flying_Circus_characters#Pepperpots "wikilink")
outfit and loads a missile onto a cart driven by [Terry
Jones](Terry_Jones "wikilink"), who is calling for scrap metal ("Any old
iron..."). The two episodes were broadcast in November 1974. Adams and
Chapman also attempted non-Python projects, including *[Out of the
Trees](Out_of_the_Trees "wikilink")*.[^14]

At this point Adams's career stalled; his writing style was unsuited to
the then-current style of radio and TV comedy.[^15] To make ends meet he
took a series of odd jobs, including as a hospital porter, barn builder,
and chicken shed cleaner. He was employed as a bodyguard by a Qatari
family, who had made their fortune in oil.[^16]

During this time Adams continued to write and submit sketches, though
few were accepted. In 1976 his career had a brief improvement when he
wrote and performed *Unpleasantness at Brodie's Close* at the [Edinburgh
Fringe](Edinburgh_Fringe "wikilink") festival. By Christmas, work had
dried up again, and a depressed Adams moved to live with his
mother.[^17] The lack of writing work hit him hard and low confidence
became a feature of Adams's life; "I have terrible periods of lack of
confidence \[..\] I briefly did therapy, but after a while I realised it
was like a farmer complaining about the weather. You can't fix the
weather – you just have to get on with it".[^18]

Some of Adams's early radio work included sketches for *[The Burkiss
Way](The_Burkiss_Way "wikilink")* in 1977 and *[The News
Huddlines](The_News_Huddlines "wikilink")*.[^19] He also wrote, again
with Chapman, 20 February 1977 episode of *[Doctor on the
Go](Doctor_on_the_Go "wikilink")*, a sequel to the *[Doctor in the
House](Doctor_in_the_House_(TV_series) "wikilink")* television comedy
series. After the [first radio series of *The Hitchhiker's
Guide*](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(radio_series) "wikilink")
became successful, Adams was made a BBC radio producer, working on
*[Week Ending](Week_Ending "wikilink")* and a pantomime called *[Black
Cinderella Two Goes
East](Black_Cinderella_Two_Goes_East "wikilink")*.[^20] He left after
six months to become the script editor for *[Doctor
Who](Doctor_Who "wikilink")*.

In 1979, Adams and [John Lloyd](John_Lloyd_(producer) "wikilink") wrote
scripts for two half-hour episodes of *[Doctor
Snuggles](Doctor_Snuggles "wikilink")*: "The Remarkable Fidgety River"
and "The Great Disappearing Mystery" (episodes eight and twelve).[^21]
John Lloyd was also co-author of two episodes from the original
*Hitchhiker* radio series ("Fit the Fifth" and "Fit the Sixth", also
known as "Episode Five" and "Episode Six"), as well as *[The Meaning of
Liff](The_Meaning_of_Liff "wikilink")* and *[The Deeper Meaning of
Liff](The_Deeper_Meaning_of_Liff "wikilink")*.

#### *Doctor Who* {#doctor_who}

Adams sent the script for the *HHGG* pilot radio programme to the
*Doctor Who* production office in 1978, and was commissioned to write
*[The Pirate Planet](The_Pirate_Planet "wikilink")*. He had also
previously attempted to submit a potential film script, called *Doctor
Who and the Krikkitmen*, which later became his novel *Life, the
Universe and Everything* (which in turn became the third *Hitchhiker's
Guide* radio series). Adams then went on to serve as script editor on
the show for its seventeenth season in 1979. Altogether, he wrote three
[*Doctor Who*
serials](List_of_Doctor_Who_episodes_(1963–1989) "wikilink") starring
[Tom Baker](Tom_Baker "wikilink") as [the
Doctor](The_Doctor_(Doctor_Who) "wikilink"):

-   *The Pirate Planet* (the second serial in the *[Key to
    Time](The_Key_to_Time "wikilink")* arc, in *[season
    16](Doctor_Who_(season_16) "wikilink")*)[^22]
-   *[City of Death](City_of_Death "wikilink")* (with producer [Graham
    Williams](Graham_Williams_(television_producer) "wikilink"), from an
    original storyline by writer [David
    Fisher](David_Fisher_(writer) "wikilink"). It was transmitted under
    the pseudonym "[David Agnew](David_Agnew "wikilink")")[^23]
-   *[Shada](Shada_(Doctor_Who) "wikilink")* (only partially filmed; not
    televised due to [industry disputes](strike_action "wikilink"), but
    was later completed using animation for the unfinished scenes and
    broadcast as "Doctor Who: The Lost Episode" on [BBC
    America](BBC_America "wikilink") 19 July 2018)[^24]

The episodes authored by Adams are some of the few that were not
novelised, as Adams would not allow anyone else to write them and asked
for a higher price than the publishers were willing to pay.[^25] *Shada*
was later adapted as a novel by [Gareth
Roberts](Gareth_Roberts_(writer) "wikilink") in 2012 and *City of Death*
and *The Pirate Planet* by [James
Goss](James_Goss_(producer) "wikilink") in 2015 and 2017 respectively.

Elements of *Shada* and *City of Death* were reused in Adams's later
novel *[Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective
Agency](Dirk_Gently's_Holistic_Detective_Agency "wikilink")*, in
particular, the character of [Professor
Chronotis](Professor_Chronotis "wikilink"). [Big Finish
Productions](Big_Finish_Productions "wikilink") eventually remade
*Shada* as an audio play starring [Paul McGann](Paul_McGann "wikilink")
as the Doctor. Accompanied by partially animated illustrations, it was
[webcast](Doctor_Who_spin-offs#Webcasts "wikilink") on the [BBC
website](BBC_Online "wikilink") in 2003, and subsequently released as a
two-CD set later that year. An omnibus edition of this version was
broadcast on the digital radio station [BBC7](BBC7 "wikilink") on 10
December 2005.

In the *Doctor Who* 2012 Christmas episode "[The
Snowmen](The_Snowmen#Production "wikilink")", writer [Steven
Moffat](Steven_Moffat "wikilink") was inspired by a storyline that Adams
pitched called *The Doctor Retires*.[^26]

#### *The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy* {#the_hitchhikers_guide_to_the_galaxy}

*The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy* was a concept for a
science-fiction comedy radio series pitched by Adams and radio producer
[Simon Brett](Simon_Brett "wikilink") to [BBC Radio
4](BBC_Radio_4 "wikilink") in 1977. Adams came up with an outline for a
pilot episode, as well as a few other stories (reprinted in [Neil
Gaiman](Neil_Gaiman "wikilink")'s book *[Don't Panic: The Official
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
Companion](Don't_Panic:_The_Official_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_Companion "wikilink")*)
that could be used in the series. ![[Towel Day](Towel_Day "wikilink")
2005 in Innsbruck, Austria, where Adams first had the idea of *The
Hitchhiker's Guide*. In the novels, a towel is the most useful thing a
space traveller can have. The annual Towel Day (25 May) was first
celebrated in 2001, two weeks after Adams's
death.](Towelday-Innsbruck.jpg "fig:Towel Day 2005 in Innsbruck, Austria, where Adams first had the idea of The Hitchhiker's Guide. In the novels, a towel is the most useful thing a space traveller can have. The annual Towel Day (25 May) was first celebrated in 2001, two weeks after Adams's death.")

According to Adams, the idea for the title occurred to him while he lay
drunk in a field in [Innsbruck](Innsbruck "wikilink"), Austria, gazing
at the stars. He was carrying a copy of the *[Hitch-hiker's Guide to
Europe](Hitch-hiker's_Guide_to_Europe "wikilink")*, and it occurred to
him that "somebody ought to write a *Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy*".[^27]

Despite the original outline, Adams was said to make up the stories as
he wrote. He turned to [John Lloyd](John_Lloyd_(producer) "wikilink")
for help with the final two episodes of [the first
series](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_Primary_and_Secondary_Phases#The_Primary_Phase "wikilink").
Lloyd contributed bits from an unpublished science fiction book of his
own, called *GiGax*.[^28] Very little of Lloyd's material survived in
later adaptations of *Hitchhiker's*, such as the novels and the TV
series. The TV series was based on the first six radio episodes, and
sections contributed by Lloyd were largely re-written.

[BBC Radio 4](BBC_Radio_4 "wikilink") broadcast the first radio series
weekly in the UK starting 8 March 1978, lasting until April.[^29] The
series was distributed in the United States by [National Public
Radio](NPR "wikilink"). Following the success of the first series,
another episode was recorded and broadcast, which was commonly known as
the Christmas Episode. [A second
series](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_Primary_and_Secondary_Phases#The_Secondary_Phase "wikilink")
of five episodes was broadcast one per night, during the week of 21–25
January 1980.

While working on the radio series (and with simultaneous projects such
as *[The Pirate Planet](The_Pirate_Planet "wikilink")*) Adams developed
problems keeping to writing deadlines that got worse as he published
novels. Adams was never a prolific writer and usually had to be forced
by others to do any writing. This included being locked in a hotel suite
with his editor for three weeks to ensure that *[So Long, and Thanks for
All the Fish](So_Long,_and_Thanks_for_All_the_Fish "wikilink")* was
completed.[^30] He was quoted as saying, "I love deadlines. I love the
whooshing noise they make as they go by."[^31] Despite the difficulty
with deadlines, Adams wrote five novels in the series, published in
1979, 1980, 1982, 1984, and 1992.

The books formed the basis for other adaptations, such as three-part
comic book adaptations for each of the first three books, an interactive
text-adventure [computer
game](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(computer_game) "wikilink"),
and a photo-illustrated edition, published in 1994. This latter edition
featured a [42 Puzzle](42_Puzzle "wikilink") designed by Adams, which
was later incorporated into paperback covers of the first four
*Hitchhiker's* novels (the paperback for the fifth re-used the artwork
from the hardback edition).[^32]

In 1980, Adams began attempts to turn the first *Hitchhiker's* novel
into a film, making several trips to Los Angeles, and working with
Hollywood studios and potential producers. The next year, the radio
series became the basis for a BBC television mini-series[^33] broadcast
in six parts. When he died in 2001 in California, he had been trying
again to get the film project started with [Disney](Disney "wikilink"),
which had bought the rights in 1998. The screenplay got a posthumous
re-write by [Karey Kirkpatrick](Karey_Kirkpatrick "wikilink"), and [the
resulting film](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(film) "wikilink")
was released in 2005.

Radio producer [Dirk Maggs](Dirk_Maggs "wikilink") had consulted with
Adams, first in 1993, and later in 1997 and 2000 about creating a third
radio series, based on the third novel in the *Hitchhiker's*
series.[^34] They also discussed the possibilities of radio adaptations
of the final two novels in the five-book "trilogy". As with the film,
this project was realised only after Adams's death. The third series,
*[The Tertiary
Phase](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_Tertiary_to_Quintessential_Phases#The_Tertiary_Phase "wikilink")*,
was broadcast on [BBC Radio 4](BBC_Radio_4 "wikilink") in September 2004
and was subsequently released on audio CD. With the aid of a recording
of his reading of *Life, the Universe and Everything* and editing, Adams
can be heard playing the part of Agrajag posthumously. *So Long, and
Thanks for All the Fish* and *Mostly Harmless* made up the fourth and
fifth radio series, respectively (on radio they were titled *[The
Quandary
Phase](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_Tertiary_to_Quintessential_Phases#The_Quandary_Phase "wikilink")*
and *[The Quintessential
Phase](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_Tertiary_to_Quintessential_Phases#The_Quintessential_Phase "wikilink")*)
and these were broadcast in May and June 2005, and also subsequently
released on Audio CD. The last episode in the last series (with a new,
"more upbeat" ending) concluded with, "The very final episode of *The
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy* by Douglas Adams is affectionately
dedicated to its author."[^35]

#### *Dirk Gently* series {#dirk_gently_series}

![Adams in March
2000](Douglas_Adams_San_Francisco.jpg "fig:Adams in March 2000") Between
Adams's first trip to Madagascar with [Mark
Carwardine](Mark_Carwardine "wikilink") in 1985, and their series of
travels that formed the basis for the radio series and non-fiction book
*[Last Chance to See](Last_Chance_to_See "wikilink")*, Adams wrote two
other novels with a new cast of characters. *[Dirk Gently's Holistic
Detective Agency](Dirk_Gently's_Holistic_Detective_Agency "wikilink")*
was published in 1987, and was described by its author as "a kind of
ghost-horror-detective-time-travel-romantic-comedy-epic, mainly
concerned with mud, music and quantum mechanics".[^36] It was derived
from two Doctor Who serials Adams had written.

A sequel, *[The Long Dark Tea-Time of the
Soul](The_Long_Dark_Tea-Time_of_the_Soul "wikilink")*, was published a
year later. This was an entirely original work, Adams's first since *So
Long, and Thanks for All the Fish.* After the book tour, Adams set off
on his round-the-world excursion which supplied him with the material
for *Last Chance to See*.

### Music {#music}

Adams played the [guitar](guitar "wikilink") left-handed and had a
collection of twenty-four left-handed guitars when he died (having
received his first guitar in 1964). He also studied piano in the
1960s.[^37] [Pink Floyd](Pink_Floyd "wikilink") and [Procol
Harum](Procol_Harum "wikilink") had important influence on Adams's work.

#### Pink Floyd {#pink_floyd}

Adams's official biography shares its name with the song "[Wish You Were
Here](Wish_You_Were_Here_(Pink_Floyd_song) "wikilink")" by [Pink
Floyd](Pink_Floyd "wikilink"). Adams was friends with Pink Floyd
guitarist [David Gilmour](David_Gilmour "wikilink") and, on Adams's 42nd
birthday, he was invited to make a guest appearance at Pink Floyd's
concert of 28 October 1994 at Earls Court in London, playing guitar on
the songs "[Brain Damage](Brain_Damage_(song) "wikilink")" and
"[Eclipse](Eclipse_(Pink_Floyd_song) "wikilink")".[^38] Adams chose the
name for Pink Floyd's 1994 album, *[The Division
Bell](The_Division_Bell "wikilink")*, by picking the words from the
lyrics to one of its tracks, "High Hopes".[^39] Gilmour also performed
at Adams's memorial service in 2001, and what would have been Adams's
60th birthday party in 2012.

### Computer games and projects {#computer_games_and_projects}

Douglas Adams created an [interactive
fiction](interactive_fiction "wikilink") version of
*[HHGG](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(computer_game) "wikilink")*
with [Steve Meretzky](Steve_Meretzky "wikilink") from
[Infocom](Infocom "wikilink") in 1984. In 1986 he participated in a
week-long brainstorming session with the [Lucasfilm
Games](Lucasfilm_Games "wikilink") team for the game
*[Labyrinth](Labyrinth:_The_Computer_Game "wikilink")*. Later he was
also involved in creating
*[Bureaucracy](Bureaucracy_(computer_game) "wikilink")* as a parody of
events in his own life.

Adams was a founder-director and Chief Fantasist of [The Digital
Village](The_Digital_Village "wikilink"), a digital media and Internet
company with which he created *[Starship
Titanic](Starship_Titanic "wikilink")*, a [Codie
award](Software_and_Information_Industry_Association#CODiE_Awards "wikilink")-winning
and [BAFTA-nominated adventure game](BAFTA#Games_Awards "wikilink"),
which was published in 1998 by [Simon &
Schuster](Simon_&_Schuster "wikilink").[^40][^41] [Terry
Jones](Terry_Jones "wikilink") wrote the accompanying book, entitled
*[Douglas Adams' Starship Titanic](Starship_Titanic "wikilink")*, since
Adams was too busy with the computer game to do both. In April 1999,
Adams initiated the [h2g2](h2g2 "wikilink") [collaborative
writing](collaborative_writing "wikilink") project, an experimental
attempt at making *The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy* a reality, and
at harnessing the collective brainpower of the internet community. It
was hosted by BBC Online from 2001 to 2011.[^42]

In 1990, Adams wrote and presented a television documentary programme
*[Hyperland](Hyperland "wikilink")*[^43] which featured [Tom
Baker](Tom_Baker "wikilink") as a "software agent" (similar to the
assistant pictured in Apple's [Knowledge
Navigator](Knowledge_Navigator "wikilink") video of future concepts from
1987), and interviews with [Ted Nelson](Ted_Nelson "wikilink"), the
co-inventor of [hypertext](hypertext "wikilink") and the person who
coined the term. Adams was an [early adopter](early_adopter "wikilink")
and advocate of hypertext.

## Personal beliefs and activism {#personal_beliefs_and_activism}

### Atheism and views on religion {#atheism_and_views_on_religion}

Adams described himself as a "radical [atheist](atheist "wikilink")",
adding "radical" for emphasis so he would not be asked if he meant
agnostic. He told [American Atheists](American_Atheists "wikilink") that
this conveyed the fact that he really meant it. He imagined a sentient
puddle who wakes up one morning and thinks, "This is an interesting
world I find myself in – an interesting hole I find myself in – fits me
rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact it fits me staggeringly well, must
have been made to have me in it!" to demonstrate his view that the
[fine-tuned universe](fine-tuned_universe "wikilink") argument for God
was a fallacy.[^44]

He remained fascinated by religion because of its effect on human
affairs. "I love to keep poking and prodding at it. I've thought about
it so much over the years that that fascination is bound to spill over
into my writing."[^45]

The evolutionary biologist and atheist [Richard
Dawkins](Richard_Dawkins "wikilink") invited Adams to participate in his
1991 [Royal Institution Christmas
Lectures](Royal_Institution_Christmas_Lectures "wikilink"), where
Dawkins calls Adams from the audience to read a passage from *[The
Restaurant at the End of the
Universe](The_Restaurant_at_the_End_of_the_Universe "wikilink")* which
satirizes the absurdity of the thought that any one species would exist
on Earth merely to serve as a meal to another species, such as humans.
Dawkins also uses Adams's influence to exemplify arguments for
non-belief in his 2006 book *[The God
Delusion](The_God_Delusion "wikilink")*. Dawkins dedicated the book to
Adams, whom he jokingly called "possibly \[my\] only convert" to
atheism[^46] and wrote on his death that "Science has lost a friend,
literature has lost a luminary, the [mountain
gorilla](mountain_gorilla "wikilink") and the [black
rhino](black_rhino "wikilink") have lost a gallant defender."[^47]

### Environmental activism {#environmental_activism}

Adams was also an [environmental
activist](environmental_activist "wikilink") who campaigned on behalf of
[endangered species](endangered_species "wikilink"). This activism
included the production of the non-fiction radio series *[Last Chance to
See](Last_Chance_to_See "wikilink")*, in which he and
[naturalist](natural_history "wikilink") [Mark
Carwardine](Mark_Carwardine "wikilink") visited rare species such as the
[kakapo](kakapo "wikilink") and [baiji](baiji "wikilink"), and the
publication of a tie-in book of the same name. In 1992 this was made
into a CD-ROM combination of [audiobook](audiobook "wikilink"),
[e-book](e-book "wikilink") and picture slide show.

Adams and Mark Carwardine contributed the 'Meeting a Gorilla' passage
from *Last Chance to See* to the book *[The Great Ape
Project](Great_Ape_Project "wikilink")*.[^48] This book, edited by
[Paola Cavalieri](Paola_Cavalieri "wikilink") and [Peter
Singer](Peter_Singer "wikilink"), launched a wider-scale project in
1993, which calls for the extension of moral equality to include all
great apes, human and non-human.

In 1994, he participated in a climb of [Mount
Kilimanjaro](Mount_Kilimanjaro "wikilink") while wearing a rhino suit
for the British charity organisation [Save the Rhino
International](Save_the_Rhino "wikilink"). Puppeteer [William
Todd-Jones](William_Todd-Jones "wikilink"), who had originally worn the
suit in the London Marathon to raise money and bring awareness to the
group, also participated in the climb wearing a rhino suit; Adams wore
the suit while travelling to the mountain before the climb began. About
£100,000 was raised through that event, benefiting schools in Kenya and
a [black rhinoceros](black_rhinoceros "wikilink") preservation programme
in [Tanzania](Tanzania "wikilink"). Adams was also an active supporter
of the [Dian Fossey](Dian_Fossey "wikilink") Gorilla Fund.

Since 2003, Save the Rhino has held an annual Douglas Adams Memorial
Lecture around the time of his birthday to raise money for environmental
campaigns.[^49]

### Technology and innovation {#technology_and_innovation}

Adams bought his first [word processor](word_processor "wikilink") in
1982, having considered one as early as 1979. His first purchase was a
Nexu. In 1983, when he and Jane Belson went to Los Angeles, he bought a
[DEC](Digital_Equipment_Corporation "wikilink")
[Rainbow](Rainbow_100 "wikilink"). Upon their return to England, Adams
bought an [Apricot](Apricot_Computers "wikilink"), then a [BBC
Micro](BBC_Micro "wikilink") and a [Tandy
1000](Tandy_1000 "wikilink").[^50] In *Last Chance to See*, Adams
mentions his [Cambridge Z88](Cambridge_Z88 "wikilink"), which he had
taken to [Zaire](Zaire "wikilink") on a quest to find the [northern
white rhinoceros](northern_white_rhinoceros "wikilink").[^51]

Adams's posthumously published work, *[The Salmon of
Doubt](The_Salmon_of_Doubt "wikilink")*, features several articles by
him on the subject of technology, including reprints of articles that
originally ran in *[MacUser](MacUser "wikilink")* magazine, and in *[The
Independent on
Sunday](The_Independent#The_Independent_on_Sunday "wikilink")*
newspaper. In these Adams claims that one of the first computers he ever
saw was a [Commodore PET](Commodore_PET "wikilink"), and that he had
"adored" his Apple Macintosh ("or rather my family of however many
Macintoshes it is that I've recklessly accumulated over the years")
since he first saw one at Infocom's offices in Boston in 1984.[^52]

Adams was a Macintosh user from the time they first came out in 1984
until his death in 2001. He was the first person to buy a Mac in Europe,
the second being [Stephen Fry](Stephen_Fry "wikilink").[^53] Adams was
also an "[Apple Master](AppleMasters "wikilink")", celebrities whom
Apple made into spokespeople for its products (others included [John
Cleese](John_Cleese "wikilink") and [Gregory
Hines](Gregory_Hines "wikilink")). Adams's contributions included a rock
video that he created using the first version of
[iMovie](iMovie "wikilink") with footage featuring his daughter Polly.
The video was available on Adams's [.Mac](.Mac "wikilink") homepage.
Adams installed and started using the first release of [Mac OS
X](macOS "wikilink") in the weeks leading up to his death. His last post
to his own forum was in praise of Mac OS X and the possibilities of its
[Cocoa](Cocoa_(API) "wikilink") programming framework. He said it was
"awesome...", which was also the last word he wrote on his site.[^54]

Adams used email to correspond with [Steve
Meretzky](Steve_Meretzky "wikilink") in the early 1980s, during their
collaboration on Infocom's version of *The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy*.[^55] While living in New Mexico in 1993 he set up another
e-mail address and began posting to his own [USENET](USENET "wikilink")
newsgroup, alt.fan.douglas-adams, and occasionally, when his computer
was acting up, to the comp.sys.mac hierarchy.[^56] Challenges to the
authenticity of his messages later led Adams to set up a message forum
on his own website to avoid the issue. In 1996, Adams was a keynote
speaker at the [Microsoft](Microsoft "wikilink") [Professional
Developers Conference](Professional_Developers_Conference "wikilink")
(PDC) where he described the personal computer as being a modelling
device. The video of his keynote speech is archived on [Channel
9](Channel_9_(discussion_forum) "wikilink").[^57] Adams was also a
keynote speaker for the April 2001 [Embedded Systems
Conference](Academic_conference "wikilink") in San Francisco, one of the
major technical conferences on [embedded
system](embedded_system "wikilink") engineering.[^58]

## Personal life {#personal_life}

Adams moved to [Upper Street](Upper_Street "wikilink"),
[Islington](Islington "wikilink"), in 1981[^59] and to Duncan Terrace, a
few minutes' walk away, in the late 1980s.[^60]

In the early 1980s Adams had an affair with novelist [Sally
Emerson](Sally_Emerson "wikilink"), who was separated from her husband
at that time. Adams later dedicated his book *[Life, the Universe and
Everything](Life,_the_Universe_and_Everything "wikilink")* to Emerson.
In 1981 Emerson returned to her husband, [Peter
Stothard](Peter_Stothard "wikilink"), a contemporary of Adams's at
[Brentwood School](Brentwood_School_(England) "wikilink"), and later
editor of *[The Times](The_Times "wikilink")*. Adams was soon introduced
by friends to Jane Belson, with whom he later became romantically
involved. Belson was the "lady barrister" mentioned in the jacket-flap
biography printed in his books during the mid-1980s ("He \[Adams\] lives
in Islington with a lady barrister and an Apple Macintosh"). The two
lived in Los Angeles together during 1983 while Adams worked on an early
screenplay adaptation of *Hitchhiker's*. When the deal fell through,
they moved back to London, and after several separations ("He is
currently not certain where he lives, or with whom")[^61] and a broken
engagement, they married on 25 November 1991.

Adams and Belson had one daughter together, Polly Jane Rocket Adams,
born on 22 June 1994, shortly after Adams turned 42. In 1999 the family
moved from London to [Santa Barbara,
California](Santa_Barbara,_California "wikilink"), where they lived
until his death. Following the funeral, Jane Belson and Polly Adams
returned to London.[^62] Belson died on 7 September 2011 of cancer, aged
59.[^63]

## Death and legacy {#death_and_legacy}

![Adams's gravestone, [Highgate Cemetery](Highgate_Cemetery "wikilink"),
North
London](Grave_of_Douglas_Adams,_Highgate.jpg "Adams's gravestone, Highgate Cemetery, North London")

Adams died of a [heart attack](myocardial_infarction "wikilink") due to
undiagnosed [coronary artery
disease](coronary_artery_disease "wikilink") on 11 May 2001, aged 49,
after resting from his regular workout at a private gym in [Montecito,
California](Montecito,_California "wikilink").[^64] His funeral was held
on 16 May in Santa Barbara. His ashes were placed in [Highgate
Cemetery](Highgate_Cemetery "wikilink") in north London in June
2002.[^65] A memorial service was held on 17 September 2001 at [St
Martin-in-the-Fields](St_Martin-in-the-Fields "wikilink") church,
[Trafalgar Square](Trafalgar_Square "wikilink"), London. This became the
first church service broadcast live on the web by the BBC.[^66]

Two days before Adams died, the [Minor Planet
Center](Minor_Planet_Center "wikilink") announced the naming of asteroid
[18610&nbsp;Arthurdent](18610&nbsp;Arthurdent "wikilink").[^67] In 2005,
the asteroid
[25924&nbsp;Douglasadams](25924&nbsp;Douglasadams "wikilink") was named
in his memory.[^68]

In May 2002, *[The Salmon of Doubt](The_Salmon_of_Doubt "wikilink")* was
published, containing many short stories, essays, and letters, as well
as eulogies from [Richard Dawkins](Richard_Dawkins "wikilink"), [Stephen
Fry](Stephen_Fry "wikilink") (in the UK edition), [Christopher
Cerf](Christopher_Cerf_(musician_and_television_producer) "wikilink")
(in the US edition), and [Terry Jones](Terry_Jones "wikilink") (in the
US paperback edition). It also includes eleven chapters of his
unfinished novel, *The Salmon of Doubt*, which was originally intended
to become a new [Dirk Gently](Dirk_Gently "wikilink") novel, but might
have later become the sixth *Hitchhiker* novel.[^69][^70]

Other events after Adams's death included a
[webcast](webcast "wikilink") production of
*[Shada](Shada_(Doctor_Who) "wikilink")*, allowing the complete story to
be told, radio dramatisations of the final three books in the
*Hitchhiker's* series, and the completion of [the film
adaptation](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(film) "wikilink") of
*[The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(novel) "wikilink")*. The
film, released in 2005, posthumously credits Adams as a producer, and
several design elements – including a head-shaped planet seen near the
end of the film – incorporated Adams's features.

A 12-part radio series based on the [Dirk
Gently](Dirk_Gently "wikilink") novels was announced in 2007.[^71]

BBC Radio 4 also commissioned a third Dirk Gently radio series based on
the incomplete chapters of *The Salmon of Doubt*, and written by [Kim
Fuller](Kim_Fuller "wikilink");[^72] but this was dropped in favour of a
BBC TV series based on the two completed novels.[^73] A sixth
*Hitchhiker* novel, *[And Another
Thing...](And_Another_Thing..._(novel) "wikilink")*, by *[Artemis
Fowl](Artemis_Fowl_(series) "wikilink")* author [Eoin
Colfer](Eoin_Colfer "wikilink"), was released on 12 October 2009 (the
30th anniversary of the first book), published with the support of
Adams's estate. A [BBC Radio 4](BBC_Radio_4 "wikilink") *[Book at
Bedtime](Book_at_Bedtime "wikilink")* adaptation and an audio book soon
followed.

On 25 May 2001, two weeks after Adams's death, his fans organised a
tribute known as [Towel Day](Towel_Day "wikilink"), which has been
observed every year since then.[^74]

In 2018, John Lloyd presented an hour-long episode of the [BBC Radio
Four](BBC_Radio_Four "wikilink") documentary *[Archive on
4](Archive_on_4 "wikilink")*, discussing Adams' private papers, which
are held at [St John's College,
Cambridge](St_John's_College,_Cambridge "wikilink").[^75] The episode is
available online.[^76]

A street[^77] in [São José](São_José,_Santa_Catarina "wikilink"), [Santa
Catarina](Santa_Catarina_(state) "wikilink"),
[Brazil](Brazil "wikilink") is named in Adams' honour.[^78]

## Awards and nominations {#awards_and_nominations}

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Year</p></th>
<th><p>Award</p></th>
<th><p>Work</p></th>
<th><p>Category</p></th>
<th><p>Result</p></th>
<th><p>Reference</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>1979</p></td>
<td><p><a href="Hugo_Award" title="wikilink">Hugo Award</a></p></td>
<td><p><em><a href="The_Hitchhiker&#39;s_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(radio_series)" title="wikilink">The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy</a></em> <small>(shared with <a href="Geoffrey_Perkins" title="wikilink">Geoffrey Perkins</a>)</small></p></td>
<td><p><a href="Hugo_Award_for_Best_Dramatic_Presentation" title="wikilink">Best Dramatic Presentation</a></p></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Works {#works}

-   *[The Private Life of Genghis
    Khan](The_Private_Life_of_Genghis_Khan "wikilink")* (1975), based on
    a comedy sketch Adams co-wrote with [Graham
    Chapman](Graham_Chapman "wikilink") (short story)
-   *[The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
    Galaxy](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(radio_series) "wikilink")* (1978)
    (radio series)
-   *[The Pirate Planet](The_Pirate_Planet "wikilink")* (1978), a
    [Doctor Who](Doctor_Who "wikilink") serial
-   *[The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
    Galaxy](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(book) "wikilink")* (1979)
    (novel)
-   *[City of Death](City_of_Death "wikilink")* (1979), a Doctor Who
    serial
-   *[Shada](Shada_(Doctor_Who) "wikilink")* (1979–1980), a Doctor Who
    serial
-   *[The Restaurant at the End of the
    Universe](The_Restaurant_at_the_End_of_the_Universe "wikilink")* (1980)
    (novel)
-   *[A Liar's Autobiography](A_Liar's_Autobiography "wikilink")
    (Volume VI)* (1980) authored by [Graham
    Chapman](Graham_Chapman "wikilink"), with [David
    Sherlock](David_Sherlock "wikilink"), Alex Martin, [David A.
    Yallop](David_A._Yallop "wikilink") and Adams
-   *[Life, the Universe and
    Everything](Life,_the_Universe_and_Everything "wikilink")* (1982)
    (novel)
-   *[The Meaning of Liff](The_Meaning_of_Liff "wikilink")* (1983
    (book), with [John Lloyd](John_Lloyd_(producer) "wikilink"))
-   *[So Long, and Thanks for All the
    Fish](So_Long,_and_Thanks_for_All_the_Fish "wikilink")* (1984)
    (novel)
-   *[The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
    Galaxy](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(computer_game) "wikilink")*
    (1984, with [Steve Meretzky](Steve_Meretzky "wikilink")) (computer
    game)
-   *[The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: The Original Radio
    Scripts](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy:_The_Original_Radio_Scripts "wikilink")*
    (1985, with [Geoffrey Perkins](Geoffrey_Perkins "wikilink"))
-   *[Young Zaphod Plays It Safe](Young_Zaphod_Plays_It_Safe "wikilink")
    (short story)* (1986)
-   *[A Christmas Fairly
    Story](The_Utterly_Utterly_Merry_Comic_Relief_Christmas_Book "wikilink")*
    (1986, with [Terry Jones](Terry_Jones "wikilink")), and
-   *Supplement to The Meaning of Liff* (1986, with [John
    Lloyd](John_Lloyd_(producer) "wikilink") and [Stephen
    Fry](Stephen_Fry "wikilink")), both part of
    -   *[The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas
        Book](The_Utterly_Utterly_Merry_Comic_Relief_Christmas_Book "wikilink")*
        (1986, edited with [Peter Fincham](Peter_Fincham "wikilink"))
-   *[Bureaucracy](Bureaucracy_(computer_game) "wikilink")* (1987)
    (computer game)
-   *[Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective
    Agency](Dirk_Gently's_Holistic_Detective_Agency "wikilink")* (1987)
    (novel)
-   *[The Long Dark Tea-Time of the
    Soul](The_Long_Dark_Tea-Time_of_the_Soul "wikilink")* (1988) (novel)
-   *[The Deeper Meaning of
    Liff](The_Deeper_Meaning_of_Liff "wikilink")* (1990, with [John
    Lloyd](John_Lloyd_(producer) "wikilink"))
-   *[Last Chance to See](Last_Chance_to_See "wikilink")* (1990, with
    [Mark Carwardine](Mark_Carwardine "wikilink")) (book)
-   *[Mostly Harmless](Mostly_Harmless "wikilink")* (1992) (novel)
-   *[The Illustrated Hitchhiker's Guide to the
    Galaxy](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(book)#Illustrated_edition "wikilink")* (1994)
-   *[Douglas Adams's Starship
    Titanic](Douglas_Adams's_Starship_Titanic "wikilink")* (1997),
    written by [Terry Jones](Terry_Jones "wikilink"), based on an idea
    by Adams
-   *[Starship Titanic](Starship_Titanic "wikilink")* (computer
    game) (1998)
-   *[h2g2](h2g2 "wikilink")* (internet project) (1999)
-   *The Internet: The Last Battleground of the 20th century* (radio
    series) (2000)
-   *[The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
    Future](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Future "wikilink")* (radio
    series) (2001) final project for [BBC Radio
    4](BBC_Radio_4 "wikilink") before his death
-   *[Parrots, the universe and
    everything](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ZG8HBuDjgc)* (2001)
-   *[The Salmon of Doubt](The_Salmon_of_Doubt "wikilink")* (2002),
    unfinished novel manuscript (11 chapters), short stories, essays,
    and interviews (also available as an audiobook, read by [Simon
    Jones](Simon_Jones_(actor) "wikilink"))
-   *[The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
    Galaxy](The_Hitchhiker's_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(film) "wikilink")* (2005)
    (film)

## TV writing credits {#tv_writing_credits}

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Production</p></th>
<th><p>Notes</p></th>
<th><p>Broadcaster</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><em><a href="Monty_Python&#39;s_Flying_Circus" title="wikilink">Monty Python's Flying Circus</a></em></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li>"<a href="List_of_Monty_Python&#39;s_Flying_Circus_episodes#6._Party_Political_Broadcast" title="wikilink">Party Political Broadcast on Behalf of the Liberal Party</a>": <a href="Patient_Abuse" title="wikilink">Patient Abuse</a> sketch (1974)</li>
</ul></td>
<td><p><a href="BBC_Two" title="wikilink">BBC Two</a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><em><a href="Out_of_the_Trees" title="wikilink">Out of the Trees</a></em></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li>Television pilot (1976)</li>
</ul></td>
<td><p>BBC Two</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><em><a href="Doctor_on_the_Go" title="wikilink">Doctor on the Go</a></em></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li>"For Your Own Good" (1977)</li>
</ul></td>
<td><p><a href="ITV_(TV_network)" title="wikilink">ITV</a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><em><a href="Doctor_Who" title="wikilink">Doctor Who</a></em></p></td>
<td><p>4 stories with 13 episodes (1978-1979, 1983):</p>
<ul>
<li>"<a href="The_Pirate_Planet" title="wikilink">The Pirate Planet</a>" (1978, 4 episodes)</li>
<li>"<a href="Destiny_of_the_Daleks" title="wikilink">Destiny of the Daleks</a>" (1979, 4 episodes) (co-written with <a href="Terry_Nation" title="wikilink">Terry Nation</a>, uncredited)</li>
<li>"<a href="City_of_Death" title="wikilink">City of Death</a>" (co-written with <a href="Graham_Williams_(television_producer)" title="wikilink">Graham Williams</a>, 1979, credited as "<a href="David_Agnew" title="wikilink">David Agnew</a>", 4 episodes)</li>
<li>"<a href="The_Five_Doctors" title="wikilink">The Five Doctors</a>" (1983) (clips from his partially filmed but unaired script for 1980’s "<a href="Shada_(Doctor_Who)" title="wikilink">Shada</a>")</li>
</ul></td>
<td><p><a href="BBC_One" title="wikilink">BBC One</a></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><em><a href="Doctor_Snuggles" title="wikilink">Doctor Snuggles</a></em></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li>"The Great Disappearing Mystery" (1979)</li>
<li>"The Remarkable Fidgety River" (1979)</li>
</ul></td>
<td><p>ITV</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><em><a href="Not_the_Nine_O&#39;Clock_News" title="wikilink">Not the Nine O'Clock News</a></em></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li>Unknown episodes (1979)</li>
</ul></td>
<td><p>BBC Two</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><em><a href="The_Hitchhiker&#39;s_Guide_to_the_Galaxy_(TV_series)" title="wikilink">The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy</a></em></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li>6 episodes (1981)</li>
</ul></td>
<td><p>BBC Two</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><em><a href="Hyperland" title="wikilink">Hyperland</a></em></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li>Television documentary (1990)</li>
</ul></td>
<td><p>BBC Two</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><em><a href="Shada_(Doctor_Who)" title="wikilink">Doctor Who: The Lost Episode</a></em></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li>Television special (2018) (1980’s unaired "<a href="Shada_(Doctor_Who)" title="wikilink">Shada</a>", with animated inserts of sections not completed in 1980)<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></li>
</ul></td>
<td><p><a href="BBC_America" title="wikilink">BBC America</a></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section class="footnotes" role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## Notes {#notes}

## References {#references}

-   Adams, Douglas (1998). [Is there an Artificial
    God?](http://www.biota.org/people/douglasadams/), speech at *Digital
    Biota 2*, Cambridge, England, September 1998.

-   

-   Dawkins, Richard (2003). "Eulogy for Douglas Adams," in *A devil's
    chaplain: reflections on hope, lies, science, and love*. Houghton
    Mifflin Harcourt.

-   Felch, Laura (2004). [Don't Panic: Douglas Adams and the
    Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy by Neil
    Gaiman](http://www.bookslut.com/nonfiction/2004_05_002057.php), May
    2004

-   Ray, Mohit K (2007). *Atlantic Companion to Literature in English*,
    Atlantic Publishers and Distributors.

-   

-   Webb, Nick (2005a). *Wish You Were Here: The Official Biography of
    Douglas Adams*. Ballantine Books.

-   Webb, Nick (2005b). ["Adams, Douglas Noël
    (1952–2001)"](http://www.oxforddnb.com/view/article/75853), *Oxford
    Dictionary of National Biography*, Oxford University Press,
    January 2005. Retrieved 25 October 2005.

-   Roberts, Jem (2014) "The Frood: The Authorised & Very Official
    Biography of Douglas Adams & The Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy"
    Preface Publishing. ["The
    Frood"](https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/1097370/the-frood)

## Further reading {#further_reading}

### Articles {#articles}

-   Herbert, R. (1980). The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (Book
    Review). Library Journal, 105(16), 1982.
-   Adams, J., & Brown, R. (1981). The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
    (Book Review). School Library Journal, 27(5), 74.
-   Nickerson, S. L. (1982). The Restaurant at the End of the Universe
    (Book). Library Journal, 107(4), 476.
-   Nickerson, S. L. (1982). Life, the Universe, and Everything (Book).
    Library Journal, 107(18), 2007.
-   Morner, C. (1982). The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (Book
    Review). School Library Journal, 28(8), 87.
-   Morner, C. (1983). Life, the Universe and Everything (Book Review).
    School Library Journal, 29(6), 93.
-   Shorb, B. (1985). So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish (Book).
    School Library Journal, 31(6), 90.
-   The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul (Book). (1989). Atlantic
    (02769077), 263(4), 99.
-   Hoffert, B., & Quinn, J. (1990). Last Chance To See (Book). Library
    Journal, 115(16), 77.
-   Reed, S. S., & Cook, I. I. (1991). Dances with kakapos. People,
    35(19), 79.
-   Last Chance to See (Book). (1991). Science News, 139(8), 126.
-   Field, M. M., & Steinberg, S. S. (1991). Douglas Adams. Publishers
    Weekly, 238(6), 62.
-   Dieter, W. (1991). Last Chance to See (Book). Smithsonian,
    22(3), 140.
-   Dykhuis, R. (1991). Last Chance To See (Book). Library Journal,
    116(1), 140.
-   Beatty, J. (1991). Good Show (Book). Atlantic (02769077),
    267(3), 131.
-   A guide to the future. (1992). Maclean's, 106(44), 51.
-   Zinsser, J. (1993). Audio reviews: Fiction. Publishers Weekly,
    240(9), 24.
-   Taylor, B., & Annichiarico, M. (1993). Audio reviews. Library
    Journal, 118(2), 132.
-   Good reads. (1995). NetGuide, 2(4), 109.
-   Stone, B. (1998). The unsinkable starship. Newsweek, 131(15), 78.
-   Gaslin, G. (2001). Galaxy Quest. Entertainment Weekly, (599), 79.
-   So long, and thanks for all the fish. (2001). Economist,
    359(8222), 79.
-   Geier, T., & Raftery, B. M. (2001). Legacy. Entertainment Weekly,
    (597), 11.
-   Passages. (2001). Maclean's, 114(21), 13.
-   Don't panic! Douglas Adams to keynote Embedded show. (2001).
    Embedded Systems Programming, 14(3), 10.
-   Ehrenman, G. (2001). World Wide Weird. InternetWeek, (862), 15.
-   Zaleski, J. (2002). The Salmon of Doubt (Book). Publishers Weekly,
    249(15), 43.
-   Mort, J. (2002). The Salmon of Doubt (Book). Booklist, 98(16), 1386.
-   Lewis, D. L. (2002). Last Time Round The Galaxy. Quadrant Magazine,
    46(9), 84.
-   Burns, A. (2002). The Salmon of Doubt (Book). Library Journal,
    127(15), 111.
-   Burns, A., & Rhodes, B. (2002). The Restaurant at the End of the
    Universe (Book). Library Journal, 127(19), 118.
-   Kaveney, R. (2002). A cheerful whale. TLS, (5173), 23.
-   Pearl, N., & Welch, R. (2003). The Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy
    (Book). Library Journal, 128(11), 124.
-   Preying on composite materials. (2003). R&D Magazine, 45(6), 44.
-   Webb, N. (2003). The Berkeley Hotel hostage. Bookseller, (5069), 25.
-   The author who toured the universe. (2003). Bookseller, (5060), 35.
-   Osmond, A. (2005). Only human. Sight & Sound, 15(5), 12–15.
-   Culture vulture. (2005). Times Educational Supplement, (4640), 19.
-   Maughan, S. (2005). Audio Bestsellers/Fiction. Publishers Weekly,
    252(30), 17.
-   Hitchhiker At The Science Museum. (2005). In Britain, 14(10), 9.
-   Rea, A. (2005). The Adams asteroids. New Scientist, 185(2488), 31.
-   Most Improbable Adventure. (2005). Popular Mechanics, 182(5), 32.
-   The Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy: The Tertiary Phase. (2005).
    Publishers Weekly, 252(14), 21.
-   Bartelt, K. R. (2005). Wish You Were Here: The Official Biography of
    Douglas Adams. Library Journal, 130(4), 86.
-   Larsen, D. (2005). I was a teenage android. New Zealand Listener,
    198(3390), 37–38.
-   Tanner, J. C. (2005). Simplicity: it's hard. Telecom Asia, 16(6), 6.
-   Nielsen Bookscan Charts. (2005). Bookseller, (5175), 18–21.
-   Buena Vista launches regional site to push Hitchhiker's movie.
    (2005). New Media Age, 9.
-   Shynola bring Beckland to life. (2005). Creative Review, 25(3),
    24–26.
-   Carwardine, M. (15 September 2007). The baiji: So long and thanks
    for all the fish. New Scientist. pp. 50–53.
-   Czarniawska, B. (2008). Accounting and gender across times and
    places: An excursion into fiction. Accounting, Organizations &
    Society, 33(1), 33–47.
-   Pope, M. (2008). Life, the Universe, Religion and Science. Issues,
    (82), 31–34.
-   Bearne, S. (2008). BBC builds site to trail Last Chance To See TV
    series. New Media Age, 08.
-   Arrow to reissue Adams. (2008). Bookseller, (5352), 14.
-   Page, B. (2008). Colfer is new Hitchhiker. Bookseller, (5350), 7.
-   I've got a perfect puzzle for you. (2009). Bookseller, (5404), 42.
-   Mostly Harmless.... (2009). Bookseller, (5374), 46.
-   Penguin and PanMac hitch a ride together. (2009). Bookseller,
    (5373), 6.
-   Adams, Douglas. Britannica Biographies \[serial online\]. October
    2010;:1
-   Douglas (Noël) Adams (1952–2001). Hutchinson's Biography Database
    \[serial online\]. July 2011;:1
-   My life in books. (2011). Times Educational Supplement, (4940), 27.

### Other {#other}

-   , established by him, and still operated by [The Digital
    Village](The_Digital_Village "wikilink")

-   

-   [Douglas Adams speech at Digital Biota
    2 (1998)](http://www.biota.org/people/douglasadams/) [(The audio of
    the speech)](http://www.biota.org/podcast/#DNA)

-   [Guardian Books "Author
    Page"](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/09/douglasadams),
    with profile and links to further articles.

-   

-   [Douglas Adams & his
    Computer](http://www.vintagemacworld.com/iifx.html) article about
    his Mac IIfx

-   BBC2 "Omnibus" tribute to Adams, presented by Kirsty Wark, 4 August
    2001

-   Mueller, Rick and Greengrass, Joel (2002). *Life, The Universe and
    Douglas Adams*, documentary.

-   Simpson, M.J. (2001). *The Pocket Essential Hitchhiker's Guide*. .
    Updated April 2005

-   [Special edition of BBC Book Club featuring Douglas
    Adams](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00fpvbm), first broadcast 2
    January 2000 on BBC Radio 4

-   

## External links {#external_links}

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

[ ](Category:Douglas_Adams "wikilink") [Category:1952
births](Category:1952_births "wikilink") [Category:2001
deaths](Category:2001_deaths "wikilink") [Category:20th-century
atheists](Category:20th-century_atheists "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century
atheists](Category:21st-century_atheists "wikilink")
[Category:20th-century English
novelists](Category:20th-century_English_novelists "wikilink")
[Category:21st-century English
novelists](Category:21st-century_English_novelists "wikilink")
[Category:Alumni of St John's College,
Cambridge](Category:Alumni_of_St_John's_College,_Cambridge "wikilink")
[Category:Apple Inc. people](Category:Apple_Inc._people "wikilink")
[Category:Audiobook narrators](Category:Audiobook_narrators "wikilink")
[Category:BBC radio producers](Category:BBC_radio_producers "wikilink")
[Category:British atheism
activists](Category:British_atheism_activists "wikilink")
[Category:British child
writers](Category:British_child_writers "wikilink") [Category:Burials at
Highgate Cemetery](Category:Burials_at_Highgate_Cemetery "wikilink")
[Category:English atheists](Category:English_atheists "wikilink")
[Category:English comedy
writers](Category:English_comedy_writers "wikilink") [Category:English
essayists](Category:English_essayists "wikilink") [Category:English
humanists](Category:English_humanists "wikilink") [Category:English
humorists](Category:English_humorists "wikilink") [Category:English
radio writers](Category:English_radio_writers "wikilink")
[Category:English science fiction
writers](Category:English_science_fiction_writers "wikilink")
[Category:English social
commentators](Category:English_social_commentators "wikilink")
[Category:English television
writers](Category:English_television_writers "wikilink")
[Category:Infocom](Category:Infocom "wikilink") [Category:Inkpot Award
winners](Category:Inkpot_Award_winners "wikilink") [Category:Interactive
fiction writers](Category:Interactive_fiction_writers "wikilink")
[Category:British male television
writers](Category:British_male_television_writers "wikilink")
[Category:Monty Python](Category:Monty_Python "wikilink")
[Category:Non-fiction environmental
writers](Category:Non-fiction_environmental_writers "wikilink")
[Category:People educated at Brentwood School,
Essex](Category:People_educated_at_Brentwood_School,_Essex "wikilink")
[Category:People from
Cambridge](Category:People_from_Cambridge "wikilink") [Category:Usenet
people](Category:Usenet_people "wikilink") [Category:Weird fiction
writers](Category:Weird_fiction_writers "wikilink")

[^1]: 

[^2]: 

[^3]: Webb 2005b

[^4]: 

[^5]: Webb 2005a, p. 32.

[^6]: 

[^7]: Botti, Nicholas. ["Interview with Frank
    Halford"](http://douglasadams.eu/interview-with-frank-halford/).
    *Life, DNA, and H2G2.* 2009. Web. Retrieved 13 March 2012. (Click on
    link at bottom for facsimile page from *Daily News* article, 7 March
    1998.)

[^8]: 

[^9]: 

[^10]: Flood, Alison (March 2014). ["Lost poems of Douglas Adams and
    Griff Rhys Jones found in school
    cupboard"](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/19/lost-school-poems-douglas-adams-griff-rhys-jones),
    *The Guardian*, 19 March 2014. Accessed 2 July 2014

[^11]: 

[^12]:  Oxford Dictionary of National
    Biography\|website=www.oxforddnb.com\|language=en\|doi=10.1093/ref:odnb/9780198614128.001.0001\|doi-broken-date=15
    December 2020\|access-date=10 June 2019}}

[^13]: 

[^14]: 

[^15]: 

[^16]: Webb 2005a, p. 93.

[^17]: 

[^18]: 

[^19]: 

[^20]: Roberts, Jem. *The Clue Bible: The Fully Authorised History of
    I'm Sorry I Haven't A Clue from Footlights to Mornington Crescent*:
    London, 2009, p164-5

[^21]: 

[^22]: 

[^23]: 

[^24]: 

[^25]: 

[^26]: 

[^27]: 

[^28]: Webb 2005a, p. 120.

[^29]: [“Grab a towel and pour yourself a Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster
    because The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is
    42”](https://www.theregister.co.uk/2020/03/09/hhgttg_42/). *The
    Register*. Retrieved 12 March 2020

[^30]: Felch 2004

[^31]: 

[^32]: [Internet Book List](http://www.iblist.com/series.php?id=2) page,
    with links to all five novels, and reproductions of the 1990s
    paperback covers that included the [42
    Puzzle](42_Puzzle "wikilink").

[^33]: 

[^34]: 

[^35]: Adams, *Dirk Maggs*, Page 356.

[^36]: 

[^37]: Webb, page 49.

[^38]: 

[^39]: 

[^40]: BBC Online (no date) ["The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: DNA
    (1952-2001)"](https://www.bbc.co.uk/cult/hitchhikers/dna/biog.shtml)
    Accessed 9 July 2014

[^41]: Botti, Nicolas (2009). ["Life, DNA & h2g2: Douglas Adams's
    Biography"](http://www.douglasadams.eu/en_adams_bio.php) Accessed 9
    July 2014

[^42]: 

[^43]: [Internet Movie Database's page for
    *Hyperland*](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0188677/)

[^44]: Adams 1998.

[^45]: 

[^46]: 

[^47]: 

[^48]: 

[^49]: 

[^50]: 

[^51]: 

[^52]: 

[^53]: 

[^54]: 

[^55]: 

[^56]: 

[^57]: 

[^58]: 

[^59]: 

[^60]: 

[^61]: 

[^62]: Webb, Chapter 10.

[^63]: 

[^64]: 

[^65]: 

[^66]: Gaiman, 204.

[^67]: 

[^68]: [Asteroid named after 'Hitchhiker' humorist: Late British sci-fi
    author honored after cosmic
    campaign](http://www.nbcnews.com/id/6867061) by Alan Boyle, NBC
    News, 25 January 2005

[^69]: 

[^70]: 

[^71]: 

[^72]: 

[^73]: 

[^74]: 

[^75]: 

[^76]: 

[^77]: 

[^78]: 

